No one can guarantee what the future will bring – but we can try to make an intelligent gamble on the available options. Whether you are a doctor trying to decide whether to trial a new treatment, a CEO trying to forecast business post-Brexit, or you simply want to know how to interpret the weather forecast, the capacity to weigh up different potential outcomes is essential for good decision-making. Unfortunately, many people are surprisingly bad at this. Luckily, a very short test – called the Berlin Numeracy Test – now allows you to assess your ability to cope with risk and uncertainty. Before you read on, you might want to try the test yourself. It takes just five minutes to complete and at the end you will discover how your own “risk literacy” compares to the average person. Click here to measure your risk literacy. The test is the brainchild of Edward Cokely, now at the University of Oklahoma. He points out that mathematical skills have long been implicated in a wide range of outcomes – but they had not focused on the particular skills we need to understand many real-world situations. Imagine, for instance, that you see the following advertisement for a new toothpaste (Zendil) that promises a 50% reduction in occurrence of gum inflammation, compared to people using a different toothpaste. Which one of the following would best help you evaluate how much a person could benefit from using Zendil? The risk of gum inflammation for people who do not use Zendil. The risk of gum inflammation for people who use a different brand of toothpaste for the same purpose. How many people there were in the group who used a different toothpaste. How old the people who participated in the study were. The correct answer is 1 – the risk of gum inflammation of people who don’t use the toothpaste. For instance, if only two people every hundred normally suffer from inflammation using the other toothpaste, then a 50% reduction would mean that only one person in every hundred enjoys healthier gums – suggesting that it offers little benefit for the vast majority of people. (You can see a more in-depth explanation of ‘relative’ and ‘absolute’ risk at this website.) Or imagine there is a 30% chance of rain tomorrow. Which of the following alternatives is the most appropriate interpretation of the forecast: It will rain tomorrow in 30% of the region. It will rain tomorrow for 30% of the time. It will rain on 30% of the days like tomorrow. The third answer is correct, but many people interpret this kind of information as meaning that it will rain for 30% of the day. The Berlin Numeracy Test measures your capacity to make these kinds of judgements. Cokely and a team of colleagues originally developed the test at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development (hence the name). And despite the fact that the test only takes a few minutes to complete, he has shown that it can predict performance on many other, more involved, measures of decision-making accuracy. You may also like: How to tame a wandering mind literacy, it should be a priority in sools. “For a society, working together, you could see how this could yield lots of economic benefits.”